In February 2024, a series of wildfires began in Chile. Multiple major fires were in the Valparaíso Region, including in Viña del Mar.


== Overview ==
Interior Minister Carolina Tohá said on 3 February that 92 forest fires were burning in central and southern Chile, which had recorded unusually high temperatures in the past week. More than 43,000 hectares of land were affected.


== Course ==


=== Valparaíso Region ===
At 3:25 on February 2, a red alert was declared in Valparaíso Province due to a 1-ha fire that affected the Las Docas road, south of Valparaíso. An hour later, it was announced that the fire affected 5 ha of land.At 3:10 p.m., another set of fires was reported in the Lago Peñuelas National Reserve, affecting 30 hectares. The fire was described as one of "rapid advance and high intensity," and caused the interruption of vehicular traffic on Routes 68 and F-718.At 3:54 p.m., another fire was reported in Lo Moscoso, affecting eight ha in the communes of Quilpué and Villa Alemana. At the same time, Marga Marga province was placed on red alert by authorities.At 5:15 p.m., the National Disaster Prevention and Response Service (Senapred) reported that the Lo Moscoso fire extended to 80 ha and ordered the evacuation of the Quebrada Escobares and Fundo El Rincón sectors of Villa Alemana. By then, the fire in the Lago Peñuelas Reserve had affected ​​480 ha.At 6:30 p.m., evacuations were ordered in Quilpué was called, followed by Viña del Mar an hour later.By 9:00 p.m., Los Andes, Petorca, Quillota, San Antonio and San Felipe de Aconcagua provinces were also placed on red alert. By 10:00 p.m. more than 6,200 ha of land had been affected by the fires.


=== O'Higgins Region ===
On January 31, authorities declared a Yellow Alert in response to active fires, including the "Maitén" fire in Navidad commune, which threatened homes and critical infrastructure, and the "La Aguada" fire in La Estrella commune. At 6:00 p.m., evacuations were ordered in La Pataguilla, La Aguada, El Maitén, and San Rafael. On February 1, evacuations were ordered in Pihuelo.
By February 2, the situation escalated significantly, leading Senapred to declare a Red Alert for the entire region, indicating greater severity of the fires and the need to mobilize all available resources for their suppression. Due to the severity of the forest fire in La Estrella, Senapred ordered the evacuation of the La Puntilla sector. At 2:00 p.m. evacuation orders were extended to other sectors of the commune. At 6:00 p.m., the evacuation of Pumanque commune was ordered. A las 19:00 se sumaron otros sectores de la comuna de La Estrella al proceso de evacuación. At 7:00 p.m., other sectors of La Estrella were ordered evacuated. By 6:00 p.m. it was reported that 3,455 hectares had been destroyed by the fires.


=== Maule Region ===
On February 1, authorities issued a Yellow Alert for the communes of Pencahue and Curepto. This measure was taken in response to the "Hijuela 3 Las Palmas" fire, which at that time affected 650 hectares and represented an immediate threat to critical infrastructure, such as telecommunications antennas.The situation quickly escalated, leading to an alert update on February 2, forcing Senapred to declare a Red Alert for Curepto, Pencahue and Sagrada Familia. This decision was driven by the expansion of the "Hijuela 3 Las Palmas" fire to 850 hectares and its extreme behavior, which included the emission of sparks and proximity to populated areas, which represented a significant risk for local communities. During the same day, in response to the "Santa Laura" forest fire in the commune of Curicó reported at 5:54 p.m. and which initially covered 5 hectares, Senapred declared a Yellow Alert for the commune. At 5:00 p.m, sectors of Curicó were ordered to evacuate. At 19:19, in response to the growth of the fire to 20 hectares, the Yellow Alert was upgraded to a Red Alert. This led to the  mobilization all available resources for its control, including the additional deployment of Conaf brigades, aircraft and the participation of the Carabineros de Chile to assist in the evacuation of the affected areas. At 10:39 p.m., the "Santa Laura" fire was declared "controlled" after affecting 30 hectares, and prompted the downgrading of the Red Alert to Yellow by Senapred and Conaf, indicating that, although the immediate threat had been overcome, resources would remain on alert to respond to any change in conditions.At 10:50 p.m., a red alert was declared in the commune of Hualañé, affecting 120 hectares.The mobilization of resources in response to the Red Alert was considerable, including the participation of firefighters from several communes (Talca, Huaquén, Pencahue, Maule, San Javier and San Rafael), multiple Conaf brigades and private companies such as Celulosa Arauco, CMPC and Vista Hermosa, as well as the use of planes and helicopters from Conaf and Celulosa Arauco, among other land and technical resources. 


=== Biobío Region ===
On February 2 at 2:19 a Red Alert was declared for the commune of Mulchén due to the forest fire called "Mininco VIII". This fire, which is being fought and has affected approximately 150 hectares, is characterized by its proximity to populated areas, extreme fire behavior, including flying sparks and erratic winds. Until that time, a brigade from the Conaf is working at the site. On January 3 at 8:48 p.m. the alert was canceled after the fire was declared under control.


=== Araucanía Region ===
On February 3, authorities declared a Red Alert for the commune of Galvarino in response to the "Colonia Suiza" and "Nilpe 4" forest fires. The "Colonia Suiza" fire affected 15 hectares while the "Nilpe 4" fire affected five hectares.


=== Los Lagos Region ===
On January 26, a forest fire began in the Los Lagos Region, which led authorities to declare a Yellow Alert after the "Camino San Antonio" fire was detected in Puerto Montt, initially affecting 6 hectares. The situation quickly worsened, leading to the declaration of a Red Alert on the same day, at 8:36 p.m., in response to the growth of the fire to 63 ha and its continued proximity to populated areas. This declaration mobilized an expanded set of resources, including Conaf brigades, firefighters from various locations, helicopters, and specialized machinery, to fight the fire effectively and protect the communities at risk.In the following days, the Red Alert was maintained, reflecting the persistent severity of the fire, which consumed 546 hectares and then increased to 804 hectares. During this period, preventive evacuations were carried out: on the morning of January 28, 74 people were evacuated from 19 homes in the affected sectors, who returned to their homes in the afternoon of the same day. In addition, temporary shelters were set up and technical tables were held to coordinate the response to the fire.The operations included the active participation of firefighters, Conaf brigades, technicians, helicopters managed by both Conaf and Senapred, and the use of highway machinery and private resources. The joint effort between different entities allowed the fire to be fought with a combination of ground and air strategies, including the use of Hercules C-130 aircraft for extinguishing operations. In addition, attention was paid to the safety of brigade members and the well-being of those affected by the fire, with the implementation of evacuation measures and the provision of temporary accommodation for those displaced from their homes.


== Casualties and damage ==
On 3 February, the number of deaths rose from 10 to at least 51. Forty-five of them were found at the scene, while the remaining six others died of burn injuries in medical facilities. The ministry of housing said that between 3,000 and 6,000 houses were affected by the fires.  A state of emergency was declared on 3 February. During a nationally televised address, president Gabriel Boric stated it was likely that the death toll will rise further.


== Response ==
The fires have prompted the deployment of 1,400 firefighters, along with military personnel, to aid in the emergency response. President Gabriel Boric ordered the deployment of more military units to help tackle the fires and urged citizens to cooperate with emergency teams. Additionally, a curfew was implemented in Viña del Mar, Limache, Quilpué, and Villa Alemana to facilitate the movement of emergency vehicles.


== See also ==
2023 Chile wildfires
2024 in Chile


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to 2024 Chile wildfires at Wikimedia Commons